.. _tinc__ref_changelog:

Changelog
=========

.. include:: includes/all.rst

**debops.tinc**

This project adheres to `Semantic Versioning <http://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html>`__
and `human-readable changelog <http://keepachangelog.com/en/0.3.0/>`__.

The current role maintainer_ is drybjed_.

Refer to the :ref:`tinc__ref_upgrade_nodes` when you intend to upgrade to a
new release.


`debops.tinc master`_ - unreleased
----------------------------------

.. _debops.tinc master: https://github.com/debops/ansible-tinc/compare/v0.4.0...master


`debops.tinc v0.4.0`_ - 2017-07-12
----------------------------------

.. _debops.tinc v0.4.0: https://github.com/debops/ansible-tinc/compare/v0.3.0...v0.4.0

Added
~~~~~

- The memlock :command:`ulimit` limit will be configured in the
  :command:`systemd` unit to avoid issues with memory limits when the
  ``--mlock`` option is enabled. [drybjed_]

- By default Tinc network connections configured with :command:`dhclient` will
  use a ``100`` metric value to impose lower priority in the routing table.
  This should mitigate issues with default routes pointing inside the VPN.
  [drybjed_]

- The YAML dictionaries that configure Tinc networks support more parameters
  related to :file:`tinc.conf`, the ``tinc_options`` parameter might not be
  needed if the default options are good enough. [drybjed_]

- The ``state: 'absent'`` network state should now correctly disable the given
  network in :command:`systemd` and remove the network configuration files from
  :file:`/etc/tinc/` directory. [drybjed_]

- Add support for configuration of DNS nameservers and search domains using
  :command:`resolvconf` script when the network interfaces are configured
  statically. [drybjed_]

- Support for persistent configuration of TemplateBasedVM on `Qubes OS`_ out of
  the box using the debops.persistent_paths_ role. [ypid_]

Changed
~~~~~~~

- The ``tinc_*_networks`` variables have been redesigned. They are now YAML
  dictionary variables that use dictionaries do define the Tinc networks. The
  old notation using YAML lists can still be used, but different data models
  cannot be combined in the same variable. You most likely will want to update
  your inventory. [drybjed_]

- The mesh configuration is now dynamically generated using lookup templates,
  the autogenerated values can be easily changed if necessary using the YAML
  dictionary parameters. [drybjed_]

- The size of the memlocked memory is based on the size of the RSA keys in use
  instead of being static. [drybjed_]

- The host files will include public IPv4 and IPv6 host addresses by default,
  along with host's FQDN. [drybjed_]

- The template lookups that configure other Ansible roles have been moved from
  the ``debops.tinc/env`` role to the ``debops.tinc`` default variables. This
  allows easier changes in the configuration if necessary. [drybjed_]

- The :command:`systemd` Tinc units have been updated to start the Tinc tunnels
  after normal network configuration is established. This should ensure the
  correct interface order and bridge connection configuration. [drybjed_]

- Make sure that the :command:`systemd` Tinc units correctly execute the
  :command:`tinc-down` scripts on service shutdown. [drybjed_]

- Change the naming scheme of the debops.ferm_ configuration files in
  anticipation of the upcoming changes. You might need to remove the old
  firewall configuration files to avoid duplicate rule entries. [drybjed_]

Removed
~~~~~~~

- The ``tinc_*_mesh0`` variables have been removed. The configuration of the
  default Tinc ``mesh0`` network is now defined in the
  :envvar:`tinc__default_networks` variable and can be easily augmented if
  needed using ``tinc__*_networks`` variables in the Ansible inventory.
  [drybjed_]

- Support for the ``[debops_service_tinc_mesh0]`` inventory group has been
  removed, the default ``mesh0`` network will include the hosts in the
  ``[debops_service_tinc]`` group. You can add hosts to the
  ``[debops_service_tinc_aux]`` group that will have Tinc installed and
  configured but will not be included in the default hosts list.

- The :command:`dhclient` hook configuration has been removed, role should
  remove the hook automatically if it's installed on the host. The
  functionality will be reimplemented in another role. Changed network route
  metric should fix the issues with the default route configured by
  :command:`dhclient`. [drybjed_]


`debops.tinc v0.3.0`_ - 2016-11-21
----------------------------------

.. _debops.tinc v0.3.0: https://github.com/debops/ansible-tinc/compare/v0.2.1...v0.3.0

Added
~~~~~

- Add ``tinc__address_family_mesh0`` and ``tinc__compression_mesh0``. [ser_]

- Add ``tinc__mlock_mesh0``. [ypid_]

- Allow to configure nodes as clients using ``tinc__client_hosts``. [ypid_]

- Add support to block default route and DNS servers offered via DHCPv4 over a
  Tinc network. Tinc nodes will not accept default routes thought the mesh
  network anymore. Furthermore allow to adjust the metric of routes created
  based on those offered via DHCPv4. [ypid_]

- Ensure that highly sensitive files are not checked into version control when
  for example :program:`etckeeper` is used for tracking changes in :file:`/etc`.
  Note that sensitive files which are already tracked by version control will
  need to be manually deleted from version control history!
  Refer to :envvar:`tinc__vcs_ignore_patterns` for more details. [ypid_]

Changed
~~~~~~~

- Update to DebOps Standards v0.2.1. [ypid_]

- Rename undocumented ``delete`` option for :ref:`tinc__ref_networks` to
  ``state`` and document it. [ypid_]

- ``tinc__inventory_hosts_mesh0`` now refers to all hosts in the Ansible
  inventory that are participating in the ``mesh0`` network. [ypid_]

- Rename ``tinc__connect_to_mesh0`` to ``tinc__reachable_peer_hosts_mesh0``.
  [ypid_]

- Increased default RSA key size from ``4096`` to ``8192`` bits as suggested by
  https://bettercrypto.org. Note that this increases the initial key generation
  from a few seconds to a few minutes which should be justifiable. [ypid_]

- Update documentation to use debops.ifupdown_ instead of the
  deprecated ``debops.subnetwork`` role. [ypid_]

- Set the correct version in the upgrade notes and update the upgrade script
  name. [drybjed_]

Fixed
~~~~~

- Redundancy and deviation in documentation. [ypid_]

- Don’t connect to the Tinc daemon node itself when working with FQDNs. [ypid_]

- Don’t rely on the legacy :command:`brctl` command to be installed (which was not ensured by
  this role) and instead use tools from the ``iproute2`` package. [ypid_]


`debops.tinc v0.2.1`_ - 2016-02-29
----------------------------------

.. _debops.tinc v0.2.1: https://github.com/debops/ansible-tinc/compare/v0.2.0...v0.2.1

Added
~~~~~

- Add a way to exclude addresses from the public key host files. The default
  ``mesh0`` configuration will automatically gather all relevant IP addresses
  and exclude them from the host files. [drybjed_]

Changed
~~~~~~~

- Use the same value type in :envvar:`tinc__host_addresses_fqdn` and
  :envvar:`tinc__host_addresses_ip_public` for consistency. [drybjed_]

- Support both strings and lists in :envvar:`tinc__host_addresses`. [drybjed_]

- Use separate :envvar:`tinc__inventory_hostname` variable synchronized with the
  ``inventory_hostname`` variable to transfer files correctly between hosts.
  [drybjed_]

- Switch init service detection from debops.core_ Ansible local fact to
  internal ``ansible_service_mgr`` variable. This increases the role
  requirements to Ansible v2.0. [drybjed_]

- Use only the hostname in the ``ConnectTo`` list if a FQDN name is used in the
  inventory. [drybjed_]


`debops.tinc v0.2.0`_ - 2016-02-22
----------------------------------

.. _debops.tinc v0.2.0: https://github.com/debops/ansible-tinc/compare/v0.1.1...v0.2.0

Changed
~~~~~~~

- Rewrite of the ``debops.tinc`` role.

  The role now supports management of multiple Tinc VPNs at the same time. By
  default a ``mesh0`` network is established, which uses the Switch mode and
  DHCP to manage network configuration.

  The new role doesn't use ``ifupdown`` configuration to manage the network
  interfaces, instead custom ``tinc-up`` and ``tinc-down`` scripts take care of
  setting up and tearing down the virtual Ethernet interface used by the VPN.

  If ``systemd`` is detected on a host, the role installs custom service units
  that allow to manage each Tinc VPN separately from the others. The role uses
  these units as needed to start/stop/restart the daemons.

  Configuration for debops.etc_services_, debops.ferm_ and
  debops.secret_ Ansible roles is generated dynamically by custom templates.
  This requires a customized Ansible playbook (see the documentation).

  Public RSA host keys are not distributed using YAML text blocks. Instead,
  debops.secret_ role manages as set of directories which can be used to
  deploy public keys to the hosts in the mesh. [drybjed_]


`debops.tinc v0.1.1`_ - 2015-11-30
----------------------------------

.. _debops.tinc v0.1.1: https://github.com/debops/ansible-tinc/compare/v0.1.0...v0.1.1

Added
~~~~~

- New variable ``tinc_interface_auto`` which controls if VPN interface will be
  started at boot time, and if Ansible will automatically manage it during
  playbook runs if any changes occur. [drybjed_]

Changed
~~~~~~~

- Change the ``tinc_host_port`` type from Int to String, so that there are no
  issues with the debops.ferm_ role. [drybjed_]

- Wrap the name of the VPN node and replace all hyphens with underscores, which
  is a ``tinc`` requirement. [drybjed_]

Fixed
~~~~~

- Fix wrong name of the variable in host template. [drybjed_]


debops.tinc v0.1.0 - 2015-05-20
-------------------------------

Added
~~~~~

- Initial release. [drybjed_]
