.. _cryptsetup__ref_changelog:

Changelog
=========

.. include:: includes/all.rst

**debops.cryptsetup**

This project adheres to `Semantic Versioning <http://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html>`__
and `human-readable changelog <http://keepachangelog.com/en/1.0.0/>`__.

The current role maintainer_ is ypid_.


`debops.cryptsetup master`_ - unreleased
----------------------------------------

.. _debops.cryptsetup master: https://github.com/debops/ansible-cryptsetup/compare/v0.5.1...master

Added
~~~~~

- Document that ``tcrypt`` and ``veracrypt`` is supported as :ref:`item.mode <cryptsetup__devices_mode>`.
  This has been tested with ``veracrypt`` and it is save to assume that ``tcrypt`` also works.
  This "feature" has not required any actual code changes to the role.
  Refer to :ref:`cryptsetup__ref_devices_veracrypt` for details. [ypid_]

- Add Debian Stretch to the support matrix of this role. No changes where required. [ypid_]


Fixed
~~~~~

- The role now requires at least Ansible v2.2 due to use of the ``check_mode:
  False`` directive. [brzhk]

- Prevent keyfiles content from being displayed when the ``--diff`` Ansible
  command line option is used. [jpiron]

- Only create keyfile and backup directories on remote systems if they are
  actually needed. [jpiron]

- Fix handling of :ref:`item.backup_header <cryptsetup__devices_backup_header>`
  which was previously ignored resulting in the global default to take affect. [jpiron]

- Don’t upgrade :envvar:`cryptsetup__base_packages`, only ensure that they are installed. [ypid_]

- Fix secrets directories creation which was ignoring
  :ref:`item.remote_keyfile <cryptsetup__devices_remote_keyfile>` and occurring only when
  :ref:`item.mode <cryptsetup__devices_mode>` was set to ``luks``. [jpiron, ypid_]

Security
~~~~~~~~

- Terminate role execution if a vulnerable Ansible version is used.
  Running the role by a vulnerable Ansible would violate one of the design goals of the role.
  The minimum Ansible version without known vulnerabilities is Ansible 2.2.3.
  Refer to `Ansible Security`_ for details. [ypid_]

- All Ansible tags need to be specified for the "Check for Ansible version
  without known vulnerabilities" task to ensure that it is always run even when
  only a subset of the role is run. [ypid_]


`debops.cryptsetup v0.5.1`_ - 2017-05-08
----------------------------------------

.. _debops.cryptsetup v0.5.1: https://github.com/debops/ansible-cryptsetup/compare/v0.5.0...v0.5.1

Fixed
~~~~~

- Fix assertion which did not properly check if the keyfile has just been
  generated. The role is intended to fail when the keyfile has been generated
  but the ciphertext block device is not available to initialize the crypto and
  filesystem layers.
  The bug only occurred when you generated the keyfile manually but did
  not set the file permissions properly. The role did interpret the permission
  change of the keyfile as generating the keyfile and therefore assumed the
  crypto layer was not yet setup.
  In the more common scenario where the keyfile was generated by the role or
  the keyfile permissions did match those the role enforces the role worked
  as intended.
  Also as the role is idempotent in this regard, it would just apply the
  changes on a later run. [ypid_]


`debops.cryptsetup v0.5.0`_ - 2017-04-02
----------------------------------------

.. _debops.cryptsetup v0.5.0: https://github.com/debops/ansible-cryptsetup/compare/v0.4.0...v0.5.0

Added
~~~~~

- Allow to configure the command to shredder/delete the keyfile and header
  backup on remote systems using :envvar:`cryptsetup__keyfile_shred_command`
  and :envvar:`cryptsetup__header_backup_shred_command`. [ypid_]

- Allow to disable management of the filesystem layer for a given device using
  :ref:`item.manage_filesystem <cryptsetup__devices_manage_filesystem>` and
  :ref:`item.create_filesystem <cryptsetup__devices_create_filesystem>`. [ypid_]

- Support to use multiple ciphers and corresponding keys to encrypt one filesystem.
  Refer to :ref:`cryptsetup__ref_devices_chaining_multiple_ciphers` for
  details. [ypid_]

- Support :command:`cryptsetup` plain mode. [ypid_]

- Support to setup an encrypted swap space (with random key or with persistent key).
  Refer to :ref:`cryptsetup__ref_devices_swap_with_random_key` for details. [ypid_]

- Support to setup filesystems using a random key on boot.
  Refer to :ref:`cryptsetup__ref_devices_tmp_with_random_key` for details. [ypid_]

- Support for persistent configuration of TemplateBasedVM on `Qubes OS`_ out of
  the box using the debops.persistent_paths_ role. [ypid_]

- Add assertion to ensure that options :ref:`item.name <cryptsetup__devices_name>`
  and :ref:`item.ciphertext_block_device <cryptsetup__devices_ciphertext_block_device>`
  of :ref:`cryptsetup__devices` are unique to catch configuration problems early. [ypid_]

- Support the generation of a passphrase instead of binary random data as keyfile
  using :ref:`item.keyfile_gen_type <cryptsetup__devices_keyfile_gen_type>`. [ypid_]

Changed
~~~~~~~

- Require Ansible v2.1 for the role which was needed to implement support for
  chaining multiple cyphers. [ypid_]

- Allow to disable management of the filesystem layer for a given device using
  :ref:`item.manage_filesystem <cryptsetup__devices_manage_filesystem>`.
  [ypid_]

- Remove the :command:`cryptsetup` device mode ``luks`` from the
  :envvar:`cryptsetup__crypttab_options` default variable.
  Note that the device mode MUST NOT be specified using
  :envvar:`cryptsetup__crypttab_options` or
  :ref:`item.crypttab_options <cryptsetup__devices_crypttab_options>` from now on!
  The :ref:`item.mode <cryptsetup__devices_mode>` option can be used to change
  the mode. [ypid_]

- Set :envvar:`cryptsetup__cipher` explicitly to ``aes-xts-plain64`` and use it also
  in plain mode which has a different complied-in default than LUKS mode. [ypid_]

- Update documentation. [ypid_]

Security
~~~~~~~~

- Terminate role execution if a vulnerable Ansible version is used.
  Running the role by a vulnerable Ansible would violate one of the design goals of the role.
  The minimum Ansible version without known vulnerabilities is Ansible 2.1.5.
  Refer to `Ansible Security`_ for details. [ypid_]


`debops.cryptsetup v0.4.0`_ - 2016-10-23
----------------------------------------

.. _debops.cryptsetup v0.4.0: https://github.com/debops/ansible-cryptsetup/compare/v0.3.1...v0.4.0

Added
~~~~~

- Guides to :ref:`cryptsetup__ref_guide_setup_loop_device` and
  :ref:`cryptsetup__ref_guide_teardown_device`.
  These guides and examples are intended for end users and should help to get
  up and running with the role. [ypid_]

- Allow to overwrite crypto defaults per device. [ypid_]

- Allow to configure the source device where the keyfile will be read from
  using :command:`dd` with :envvar:`cryptsetup__keyfile_source_dev`.
  Intended for integration testing of the role. [ypid_]

Changed
~~~~~~~

- Updated to latest DebOps Standards. [ypid_]

- Changed role namespace from ``cryptsetup_`` to ``cryptsetup__``.
  :regexp:`cryptsetup_[^_]` variables are dropped and don’t have any effect
  anymore.
  Refer to :ref:`cryptsetup__ref_upgrade_nodes_v0.4.0`. [ypid_]

Fixed
~~~~~

- Don’t fail in check mode when the keyfile has not yet been generated.
  This requires to limit the tasks even more which are run in check mode. [ypid_]

- Don’t fail when a device was never in state present and is requested to be
  absent. [ypid_]


`debops.cryptsetup v0.3.1`_ - 2016-04-04
----------------------------------------

.. _debops.cryptsetup v0.3.1: https://github.com/debops/ansible-cryptsetup/compare/v0.3.0...v0.3.1

Changed
~~~~~~~

- No need to have a default for ``cryptsetup_state`` in the tasks.
  ``cryptsetup_state`` is expected to be valid. [ypid_]

Removed
~~~~~~~

- Remove header backups on remote system when ``cryptsetup_header_backup`` is set to ``False``. [ypid_]

Fixed
~~~~~

- Fixed usage of the ``role::cryptsetup:backup`` tag. [ypid_]

- Fixed permission enforcement of the header backup on the Ansible controller. [jacksingleton_]


`debops.cryptsetup v0.3.0`_ - 2016-03-23
----------------------------------------

.. _debops.cryptsetup v0.3.0: https://github.com/debops/ansible-cryptsetup/compare/v0.2.1...v0.3.0

Added
~~~~~

- Added support to setup and mount an encrypted filesystem without storing the
  keyfile on persistent storage of the remote system. [ypid_]

- Added ``cryptsetup_secret_owner``, ``cryptsetup_secret_group`` and
  ``cryptsetup_secret_mode`` to allow to change file permissions of the secrets
  directory and files on the Ansible controller. [ypid_]

Changed
~~~~~~~

- Renamed option ``cryptsetup_backup_header`` to ``cryptsetup_header_backup``
  and fixed the task to allow to disable header backups.
  Fixed: Honor the value of ``item.backup_header`` (``cryptsetup_devices``).
  Only disable header backups when you know what you are doing! [ypid_]

- Renamed option ``cryptsetup_keyfile_location`` to
  ``cryptsetup_secret_path`` as it also contains the header backup on the
  Ansible controller. [ypid_]

- ``cryptsetup_mount_options`` and ``cryptsetup_crypttab_options`` are now
  lists of strings to allow more flexibility. [ypid_]

- Renamed ``cryptsetup_use_random`` to ``cryptsetup_use_dev_random`` to
  emphasize it’s meaning. [ypid_]

Removed
~~~~~~~

- Removed default mount options ``user`` and ``auto`` because they are not good
  defaults for the role. [ypid_]


`debops.cryptsetup v0.2.1`_ - 2015-12-01
----------------------------------------

.. _debops.cryptsetup v0.2.1: https://github.com/debops/ansible-cryptsetup/compare/v0.2.0...v0.2.1

Changed
~~~~~~~

- Fail when keyfile has been generated but ciphertext block device is not
  available. [ypid_]

- Update :file:`.travis.yml` configuration to test the role on Travis-CI.
  [drybjed_]

- Update documentation and change the required Ansible version to ``v1.9.0``
  due to the ``become`` option replacing :command:`sudo`. [drybjed_]

- Migrated to the DebOps project as ``debops.cryptsetup``. [drybjed_]


`debops-contrib.cryptsetup v0.2.0`_ - 2015-10-30
------------------------------------------------

.. _debops-contrib.cryptsetup v0.2.0: https://github.com/debops/ansible-cryptsetup/compare/v0.1.0...v0.2.0

Added
~~~~~

- Wrote initial documentation. [ypid_]

Changed
~~~~~~~

- Major rewrite to allow to create the crypto and filesystem-layer by this
  role. [ypid_]

- Moved to `DebOps Contrib`_ (the role is still available under
  ``ypid.crypttab`` until it has been fully renamed to
  ``debops.cryptsetup``). [ypid_]


ypid.crypttab v0.1.0 - 2015-09-07
---------------------------------

Added
~~~~~

- Initial coding and design. [ypid_]
