.. Copyright (C) 2019-2023 Robin Schneider <ypid@riseup.net>
.. Copyright (C) 2023 David Härdeman <david@hardeman.nu>
.. Copyright (C) 2019-2023 DebOps https://debops.org/
.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-only

Getting started
===============

.. only:: html

   .. contents::
      :local:


Initial Setup
-------------

This role configures hosts for four different functionalities in the backup process.

First of all, the ``common`` playbook needs to have ran on all clients,
as it relies on the :ref:`debops.root_account` role to have generated SSH keys.

**Servers** are SSH-accessible repositories for backup archives.
They run ``borg``, and backups happen on them without intermediate storage.
They need to be in place before clients initialize any repositories on them.

**Clients** are the hosts that produce recurring backups.
They run ``borgmatic``, a ``borg`` configuration tool, to host repository definitions.
They can host local backups, although borg recommends syncing to multiple repositories
directly over copying a local one.

**Controllers** allow centralizing the timing on backups by initiating them via a
control user. They have nothing to do with borg, they just tell a client to back up to
its servers.

**Controlled** Clients are configured to allow access to control users to start
their ``borgmatic`` service.

The control groups can be used as mix-ins on existing client-server configuration.
If you're setting it up all at once, the right order is:

1. Running the debops ``common`` playbook on everything, so clients generate keypairs
2. **Controllers**, so they can generate keypairs for their control user
3. **Servers**, so clients can initialize repos on them
4. **Clients**

Since borg backups happen over ssh, any hosts that initiate connections need to
know each other first.

* Clients connect to servers
* Controllers connect to (controlled) clients

This can be achieved in inventory ``host_vars`` with the :ref:`debops.sshd` role:

.. code-block:: yaml

   sshd__host_known_hosts:
     # host fqdn
     - myclient.example.com


Borg Clients
------------

A **borg client** generates backups and dumps them to local or remote repositories.

To set up a host as a client, add it to the ``debops_service_borgbackup`` group.

The client will be running :command:`borgmatic` as ``root``, and will be able to
connect to backup servers via SSH to run :command:`borg serve` with the SSH key
generated by default by the :ref:`debops.root_account` role
(which is executed as part of the :file:`common.yml` playbook).

Repository passwords and per-client encryption keys are stored on the Ansible
controller in :file:`secret/borgbackup/clients/{hostname}/`.

:command:`systemd` will be configured to trigger regular backups and securely
store repository passphrases as systemd credentials.

On systems that do not support systemd, :man:`cron(8)` will be configured instead,
reading its credentials directly from a plaintext file (only readable by ``root``).

A few key service-related client variables:

.. code-block:: yaml

   # This would keep the recurring backup service disabled
   # Credentials at /etc/borgmatic/passphrases will still be generated
   borgbackup__service_enabled: False # Defaults to True

   # This prevents the systemd job from accessing the real /root
   borgbackup__service_protect_root: False # If you need to back up /root

   # The systemd job only has write access to specific directories
   # Syncing remote repositories requires none
   # Local repositories (or their parent directory) need to be listed here
   borgbackup__service_rw_directories:
     - /mnt/backup


.. _borgbackup__ref_configuration_examples:

Borgmatic
~~~~~~~~~

Client configuration is done with :command:`borgmatic`,
following its `per-application backups`__ documentation to allow inventory and
dependent roles to add configuration files of their own in :file:`/etc/borgmatic.d/`.

.. __: https://torsion.org/borgmatic/docs/how-to/make-per-application-backups/

The role uses :ref:`universal_configuration` to deploy config files on a host via
``borgbackup__*_configuration`` variables.
See :ref:`borgbackup__ref_configuration` for its full usage reference.

Each configuration item templates a ``yaml`` document.
* files in :file:`/etc/borgmatic/includes/` hold configuration fragments, such as common defaults
* files in :file:`/etc/borgmatic/repos/` contain base debops repo configuration
* units in :file:`/etc/borgmatic.d/` are read in sequence by default
* :file:`/etc/borgmatic/config.yaml` is also read as a unit, if it exists

This setup takes advantage of borgmatic's deep merging to allow the role to lay out
defaults and credentials while allowing inventory configuration to override any of it.

By default, the role generates a :file:`/etc/borgmatic/includes/common.yaml`,
which you *may* include in your configuration.

The ``repo`` config ``type`` provides repository initialization and configuration.

.. code-block:: yaml

   borgbackup__group_configuration:
     # Configures backups for my documents
     - name: documents
       comment: Top of the file comment for the documents.yaml unit

       # The repo type templates an include at /etc/borgmatic/repos/[name].yaml
       type: repo
       # It holds the configuration debops needs to manage to set it up
       # It's also future-proofed for the syntax changes between 1.7.7 and 1.8.1

       # These were a list of paths before version 1.7.10. On older versions,
       # the role will accept the new syntax but silently ditch the labels.
       repositories:
         # local repositories will be included to the paths systemd can edit
         - path: /mnt/backup/documents.repo
         # SSH access needs to work already, as repo init happens directly there
         - path: 'ssh://{{ my__user }}@{{ my__server }}/{{ ansible_hostname }}.repo'
         - path: ssh://user@external-server/./documents.borg
           label: backup-box

       # Include the includes/common.yaml, defined by debops by default
       include: common # repos/documents.yaml will be automatically appended

       # This will be rendered in the final unit file | to_nice_yaml
       yaml:
         # This is the /etc/borgmatic.d/documents.yaml unit, starting with:
         # <<: !include ['includes/common.yaml', 'repos/documents.yaml']

         # The actual work to do is up to you
         # Before 1.8.0, this would belong in a "location" section.
         source_directories:
           - '/home/{{ my__user }}/My Documents'

         # These comments will be lost, only (nice) yaml will remain.
         exclude_patterns:
           - '*.pyc'
           - '*/.vim*.tmp'
           - '/home/{{ my__user }}/My Documents/*/.cache'


The above will initialize all local and remote repositories with a generated
passphrase stored in :file:`secret/[hostname]/[repo]_passphrase.txt`, and back up
the host's borg keys at :file:`secret/[hostname]/borg_config_[hostname].tar` on the
ansible controller.


.. attention::

   The role is designed for compatibility with borgmatic version ``1.7.7``,
   currently in Debian ``bookworm`` at the time of writing.

   As there are significant differences between bookworm's ``1.7.7`` and ``1.8.0``,
   that can deeply affect your whole approach to your specific configuration.
   The role aims to accommodate either version in inventory, by doing version
   checks for the minimal code it templates itself, and leaving the rest up to you.

   Examples are in the post ``1.8.0`` syntax. If you are on ``bookworm``,
   you **will need** a configuration reference for your version.
   Get it with :command:`borgmatic config generate --destination [file]`.
   Prior to version ``1.7.15`` that's :command:`generate-borgmatic-config`.


The ``unit`` (default) and ``include`` types allow arbitrary hot and cold configs.

.. code-block:: yaml

   borgbackup__configuration:

     # This will output /etc/borgmatic/includes/constants.yaml
     - name: constants
       type: include # It will not try to validate until included
       comment: Lucky users over version 1.7.10 get to use these
       raw: |
         # This will be rendered as it is.
         # After the yaml field, if it exists, but why use both.
         constants:
           our_company: example.com

     - name: manual
       type: unit # default, will try to validate
       comment: This is a backup I want to run manually with --config
       # Manually set path: anything but config.yaml in /etc/borgmatic is safe
       path: /etc/borgmatic/manual.yaml
       include:
         - constants
         - common
       # Imagine an example config, but prettier
       raw: '{{ lookup("template", "my__template.yaml.j2") }}'


And these conclude the tour.

As a demonstration, let's implement soft failures from borgmatic's
`How to backup to a removable drive or an intermittent server`__
on our previous ``documents`` repo.

.. __: https://torsion.org/borgmatic/docs/how-to/backup-to-a-removable-drive-or-an-intermittent-server/


.. code-block:: yaml

   borgbackup__host_configuration:

     # This will output a documents-removable.yaml unit next to our documents.yaml
     # Using the previous config as a starting point
     - name: documents-removable
       type: unit
       comment: Also back up to my removable cassette

       include:
         # Versions before ``1.8.1`` may only include the repo string,
         # But, as defined in the example above, it will chain "common" along with it
         - common
         # Including shortnames would resolve them to ``includes/[name].yaml``
         - /etc/borgmatic/repos/documents.yaml

       yaml:
         # This will be merged into the repositories list defined by the repo config
         # Different versions of borgmatic have different options to control merging
         repositories:
           - path: /mnt/removable/documents.borg

         before_backup:
           - findmnt /mnt/removable > /dev/null || exit 75


Now this unit will soft-fail if my cassette is not mounted, then borgmatic will
log it and continue processing the rest of the configuration.


Borg Servers
------------

A **borg server** allows backup-generating clients to connect to it with limited
SSH user accounts, and act on repositories hosted there.

To set up a server, add it to the ``[debops_service_borgbackup_server]`` group.

A server must be running the same version of borg as the clients syncing to it.

The role uses :ref:`universal_configuration` to deploy backup user accounts
with ``borgbackup__server_*_accounts`` variables.

See :ref:`borgbackup__ref_server_accounts` for its full usage reference.

.. code-block:: yaml

   borgbackup__server_host_accounts:

     # This user will allow access to an inventory-configured client
     - name: 'borg-{{ my__client }}'
       # The inventory shortname will pull the pubkey from the host
       clients:
         - '{{ my__client }}'

     # All we really need is a username and a public key
     - name: borg-manual
       home: /mnt/manual
       append_only: True # I like to prune

       # Manually entered ssh keys are passed to debops.authorized_keys
       sshkeys:
         - '{{ lookup("file", secret + "/manual.rsa" ) }}'

       # The users_extra and authorized_keys_extra variables
       # can be used to tweak the underlying debops role configuration.
       users_extra:
         home_mode: '750'
       # Will be passed to both underlying roles.
       state: present


The above config will generate two user accounts on the server, allowing them
access *to a fixed invocation* of the :command:`borg` command.

These can then be used **in client configuration** to initialize repositories in
the users home directories:

.. code-block:: yaml

   repositories:
     - path: 'ssh://borg-{{ my__client }}@{{ my__fqdn }}/./my_backup.repo'
       label: My automagically configured cloud

     - path: 'ssh://borg-manual@{{ my__fqdn }}/./my_documents.repo'
       label: Document storage for my friend, Manual # Thx codespell


Controlled Synchronization
--------------------------

Orchestrating backups from a single controller may be preferable for availability or
resource allocation reasons.
To accommodate this, the role can configure a *control user* to connect on a list of
client hosts in sequence, restricted to running the borgmatic service unit.

This is not borg's `pull mode`__.
This feature does not modify any part of the *client* and *server* configuration,
it works on top of it.

.. __: https://borgbackup.readthedocs.io/en/stable/deployment/pull-backup.html

Configuring the behavior on a single network with the default control user requires:

* adding **one** controller to the ``debops_service_borgbackup_controller`` group
* all clients to the ``debops_service_borgbackup_controlled`` group
* setting ``borgmatic__service_enabled`` to ``False`` for all hosts


Controllers
~~~~~~~~~~~

A controller is configured by adding it to the ``[debops_service_borgbackup_controller]``
group. It doesn't even need to have :command:`borg`.

It runs a ``borg-controller`` service, which in turn connects via SSH to all clients
in sequence as ``borgbackup__control_user`` (Defaults to ``borg-control``).

The borg controller's public key is stored in :file:`secret/borgbackup/control/[user]_id_ed25519.pub`

.. code-block:: yaml

   # A list of hosts to call in sequence
   # It defaults to the whole _controlled group
   borgbackup__controlled_clients:
     - brie
     - cheddar
     # Anything not matching a shortname in the _controlled group
     # Will be used as a connection string to a non-inventory host
     - peckish@gorgonzola.example.com


The controller will simply :command:`ssh -T` to all addresses on this list,
relying on each client to run a specific command through a ``command=`` directive in
its SSH configuration. In theory you could add your teapot to it.

The role keeps track of control users only by name, so do use different
usernames (or change the :envvar:`borgbackup__controller_public_key` lookup)
if setting up multiple clusters.

The role only has access to explicitly defined variables of the clients when
setting up the controller, so if you're using a non-default control user,
make sure it is set in inventory on all clients, too.


Controlled Clients
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``debops_service_borgbackup_controlled`` group adds the **control user** to
clients configured by the ``debops_service_borgbackup`` group.

Configuring a controlled client requires its controller to have generated its
keypair first.

.. code-block:: yaml

  # Disable the locally running service on the client
  borgbackup__service_enabled: False


The role will create the ``borgbackup__control_user`` and allow the controller
to connect to it and run the borgmatic one shot service, or borgmatic directly
on non-systemd hosts.


Example playbook
----------------

If you are using this role without DebOps, here's an example Ansible playbook
that uses the ``debops.borgbackup`` role:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../ansible/playbooks/service/borgbackup.yml
   :language: yaml
   :lines: 1,5-


Ansible tags
------------

You can use Ansible ``--tags`` or ``--skip-tags`` parameters to limit what
tasks are performed during Ansible run. This can be used after a host was first
configured to speed up playbook execution, when you are sure that most of the
configuration is already in the desired state.

Available role tags:

``role::borgbackup``
  Main role tag, should be used in the playbook to execute all of the role
  tasks as well as role dependencies.

``role::borgbackup:install``
  Performs tasks related to software installation.

``role::borgbackup:service``
  Tasks related to configuring and enabling recurring backups with
  :command:`systemd` or :command:`cron` on the ``pull`` and ``client`` sections
  of the role.

``role::borgbackup:config``
  Performs tasks related to templating borgmatic configuration files on clients.

``role::borgbackup:server``
  Server configuration section.

``role::borgbackup:control``
  Control configuration section, covering controller and controlled client
  functionality.

``role::borgbackup:client``
  Client configuration section.
